dehazingdiffusion (#179)
creatis-myriad/creatis-myriad.github.io: collections/_posts/2024-04-18-DehazingDiffusion.md

---
layout: review
title: "Dehazing Ultrasound using Diffusion Models"
tags: diffusion-models, ultrasound-imaging, denoising
author: "Julia Puig"
cite:

>     authors: "Tristan S.W. Stevens, Faik C. Meral, Jason Yu, Iason Z. Apostolakis Jean-Luc Robert and Ruud J.G. van Sloun"

Reviewer: Missing comma:
```suggestion
    authors: "Tristan S.W. Stevens, Faik C. Meral, Jason Yu, Iason Z. Apostolakis, Jean-Luc Robert and Ruud J.G. van Sloun"
```

    title:   "Dehazing Ultrasound using Diffusion Models"
    venue:   "IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging (2023)"
pdf: "http://arxiv.org/abs/2307.11204"
---

<br/>

# Ultrasound image quality
During ultrasound acquisitions, phenomena such as aberration and reverberation produce unwanted echoes that degrade the image quality. In particular, **haze** is an artifact that occurs due to multipath reflections and produces a white haze on the echo image.

{:refdef: style="text-align: center;"}
![](/collections/images/DehazingDiffusion/echo_images.jpg){: width="500" }
{:refdef}

> This phenomenon can highly **difficult diagnosis** both qualitative and quantitative.

Reviewer: Phrasing:
```suggestion
This phenomenon can **make diagnosis much more difficult**, both qualitative and quantitative.
```

Existing dehazing techniques:

> - **Harmonic imaging** receives echoes at frequencies that are multiples of the original frequency. It produces higher quality images, as multipath scatterers have less energy and therefore generate fewer harmonics. However, it results in reduced penetration depth and image frame rate due to the additional pulse inversion transmits.

Reviewer: Is _transmits_ (at the end) the right word? Could it be something like _transmission_?

Author: yes indeed it should be that way

- **Clutter filtering methods.**

> 	- Block-matching and 3D filtering algorithm (BM3D) works by grouping similar patches of the image and then stacking and filtering them. It needs assumptions on the noise distribution.

Reviewer: Conjugation:
```suggestion
	- Block-matching and 3D filtering algorithm (BM3D) work by grouping similar patches of the image and then stacking and filtering them. It needs assumptions on the noise distribution.
```

Author: BM3D is a single algorithm, so it should be "works", no?

Reviewer: You're absolutely right, and I misread the sentence originally :upside_down_face:

	- Temporal decompositions (PCA, SVD) allow to separate data correspoding to rapidly moving events (tissue) from data corresponding to stationary events (clutter). This assumption is not always true, leading to mistakes.
	- etc.
- **Deep learning methods.** Supervised approaches have been implemented to supress reverberation haze. They require of a supervised dataset and may have difficulty to generalize across datasets.

The authors propose to perform dehazing as a post-processing step with **diffusion models**, which can model highly complex data distributions without having to rely on basic assumptions. In particular, they model the distribution of both clean tissue and haze using two separate score-based networks. Then, they perform posterior sampling for dehazing.

<br/>

# Methods

## Formulation of the dehazing process

> Backscattered echoes are recieved by the ultrasound probe. The resulting ultrasound signal

Reviewer: Typo:
```suggestion
Backscattered echoes are received by the ultrasound probe. The resulting ultrasound signal
```

<br/>

## Score-based diffusion models
The main idea of **score-based models** is to represent a probability distribution
$$p(x)$$
by modeling the gradient of the log probability density function
$$\nabla_x \log{p(x)},$$
known as the **score function**.

In a **diffusion process**, clean data
$$x$$
from distribution
$$p(x)$$
is corrupted to some distribution
$$\pi(x)$$
through a sequence of Gaussian perturbations. It can be written in a simplified form using the following stochastic differential equation (SDE):

$$ dx_t = \sigma^t dw, $$

where
$$\sigma$$
accounts for the diffusion trajectory at time step
$$t,$$
$$w$$
denotes Brownian motion and
$$dw$$
infinitesimal white noise.

We want to **reverse** the diffusion process so that we can sample from
$$p(x).$$
The reversed process can be written as a reverse-time SDE:

$$ dx_t = -\sigma^{2t} \underbrace{\nabla_{x_t} \log p(x_t)}_\text{score}dt + \sigma^t dw_t, $$

> where the score function needs to be estimated. It can be learnt by a neural network

Reviewer: Conjugation:
```suggestion
where the score function needs to be estimated. It can be learned by a neural network
```

where 
$$q(x_t|x_0) \sim N(x_0, \sigma^t)$$
is the perturbation kernel of the diffusion process. With a sufficiently large dataset, DSM enables approximating the true score
$$s_{\theta}(x_t,t) \simeq \nabla_{x_t} \log p(x_t).$$

Then, during inference the learned score function is substituted in the reverse-time SDE and the reverse-time diffusion process is discretized in a series of time steps and solved with the Euler-Maruyama method. The update rule is given by:

$$ x_{t-\Delta t} = x_t - \sigma^{2t} s_{\theta}(x_t)\Delta t +\sigma^t \sqrt{|\Delta t|}z, $$

where
$$z \sim N(0,1).$$
The score-based denoising term moves the solution towards
$$p(x)$$
and the second term corrupts it again to correct errors made in earlier sampling steps to prevent solutions to converge solely to high-density regions.

(For more details, look at the [tutorial on score-based diffusion models](https://creatis-myriad.github.io./tutorials/2023-05-09-tutorial-score-based-models.html).)

<br/>

## Proposed dehazing method

> The authors tailored several techniques used in deep learning and diffusion models to effciently apply them to ultrasound data.

Reviewer: Typo:
```suggestion
The authors tailored several techniques used in deep learning and diffusion models to efficiently apply them to ultrasound data.
```

$$s_{\theta}(x_t,t) \simeq \nabla_{x_t} \log p(x_t)$$
and
$$s_{\psi}(h_t,t) \simeq \nabla_{h_t} \log p(h_t).$$
The gradients of the posterior with respect to
$$x$$
and
$$h$$
are:

$$ \begin{equation*}
\begin{cases}
	\nabla_{x_t} \log p(x_t,h_t|y) \approx s^*_{\theta}(x_t,t) + \nabla_{x_t} \log p(y|x_t,h_t) \\
	\nabla_{h_t} \log p(x_t,h_t|y) \approx s^*_{\psi}(h_t,t) + \nabla_{h_t} \log p(y|x_t,h_t) 
\end{cases}
\end{equation*} $$

Then, substituting the posterior in the joint conditional reverse-time SDE allows to sample from the posterior and eventually obtain both the dehazed signal
$$x$$
and the haze estimation
$$h.$$

Finally, the likelihood
$$p(y|x_t,h_t)$$
is usually intractable and has to be approximated. A solution is to corrupt the measurement
$$y$$
along the diffusion process
$$\{y_t\}_{t\in[0,1]}.$$
We obtain the projected value
$$ \hat{y}_t \sim q(y_t|y_0), $$
which is an approximation of the noise-perturbed likelihood:

$$ p(y|x_t,h_t) \approx p(\hat{y}_t|x_t,h_t) \sim N(x_t + h_t, \rho^2I). $$

<u>Learning ultrasound priors</u>

> Usually, generative models are used for applications in the image domain. In the case of ultrasound signals, some considerations need to be made.

Reviewer: Phrasing:
```suggestion
Usually, generative models are used for applications in the image domain. In the case of ultrasound signals, some considerations need to taken into account.
```

Author: i think you forgot a "be" before taken. i did a commit with the proposed changes
